---
layout: post
title: "Onward"
date: 2013-01-18 10:30
comments: true
categories:
---

My friend IM'd me a link the other day to a document he and a colleague wrote
at the end of 2011, listing all the things they wanted to make happen in the
world of web development in 2012.

"We did almost all of it," he said.

"Well shit," I said. "I should write up something like this for 2013."

"Why do you think I showed it to you?"

---

A year ago I was working at Toura, a startup based in New York that was
developing software to make it easy to create content-centric mobile
applications. I started there as a consultant back in 2010, helping them write
a saner version of the prototype they'd developed in the months before.

I got the gig because apparently I spoke with their director of development,
Matt, at a meetup in Brooklyn, though I actually have no recollection of this.
By this time last year, I'd been there for more than a year, and Matt and I had
convinced the company a few months before that the technology we'd developed --
a JavaScript framework called Mulberry that ran inside of a Phonegap wrapper
-- was worth open-sourcing.

I spent much of January and February speaking at meetups and events --
Vancouver, Boston, Austin, Charlotte -- telling people why Mulberry was
something they might consider using to develop their own content-centric mobile
apps. By March, though, it was clear that Toura was headed in a direction that
was different from where I wanted to go. As it turned out, Matt and I gave our
notice on the same day.

---

April was the first time in almost 10 years that I purposefully didn't work for
a solid month. I spent almost two weeks in Europe, first in Berlin and then in
Warsaw for [Front Trends](http://2013.front-trends.com/). I sold my car -- it
mostly just sat in the driveway anyway -- to make Melissa feel a bit better
about the part where I wasn't making any money.
[Tiffany](http://twitter.com/theophani) was a marvelous host; we took the train
together from Berlin to Warsaw for the conference, barely talking the whole way
as we worked on our respective presentations. Warsaw was a two-day whirlwind of
wonderful people -- Melanie, Milos, Chris, Alex, Frances -- memorable for my
terrible laryngitis and capped by endless hours of post-conference celebration
in the hotel lobby, which was magically spotless when we made our way,
bleary-eyed, to the train station early the next morning.

I flew home two days later; two days after that, I started at
[Bocoup](http://bocoup.com/).

---

Taking a job at Bocoup was a strategic change of pace for me. For 18 months, I
had been immersed in a single product and a single codebase, and I was the
architect of it and the expert on it. As fun as that was, I was ready to
broaden my horizons and face a steady stream of new challenges in the company
of some extremely bright people.

As it turned out, I ended up focusing a lot more on the training and education
side of things at Bocoup -- I spent the summer developing an updated and more
interactive version of [jQuery Fundamentals](http://jqfundamentals.com), and
worked through the summer and fall on developing and teaching various
JavaScript trainings, including a really fun two-day course on writing testable
JavaScript. I also worked on creating a
[coaching](http://training.bocoup.com/coaching/) offering, kicked off a
[screencasts](http://training.bocoup.com/screencasts/) project, and had some
great conversations as part of [Bocoup on Air](https://plus.google.com/101066175187812737186/posts).
Throughout it all, I kept up a steady schedule of speaking -- TXJS, the jQuery Conference,
Fronteers, Full Frontal, and more.

Though I was keeping busy and creating lots of new content, there was one thing
I wasn't doing nearly enough of: writing code.

---

I went to New York in November to speak at the New York Times [Open Source Science Fair](http://opensourcesciencefair.com/),
and the next day I dropped in on Matt, my old boss from Toura, before heading
to the airport. He's working at another startup these days, and they're using
[Ember](http://emberjs.com/) for their front-end.  Though I was lucky enough to
get a guided tour of Ember from Tom Dale over the summer, I'd always felt like
I wouldn't really appreciate it until I saw it in use on a sufficiently complex
project.

As it turned out, Matt was looking for some JavaScript help; I wasn't really
looking for extra work, but I figured it would be a good chance to dig in to a
real Ember project. I told him I'd work for cheap if he'd tolerate me working
on nights and weekends. He gave me a feature to work on and access to the repo.

The first few hours with Ember were brutal. The next few hours were manageable.
The hours after that were magical. The most exciting part of all, despite all
the brain hurting along the way, was that I was solving problems with code
again. It felt good.

---

With much love to my friends and colleagues at Bocoup, I've realized it is time
to move on. I'll be taking a few weeks off before starting as a senior
software engineer at [Bazaarvoice](http://www.bazaarvoice.com/), the company
behind the ratings and reviews on the websites of companies such as WalMart,
Lowe's, Costco, Best Buy, and lots more.

If you're in the JS world, Bazaarvoice might sound familiar because [Alex Sexton](http://alexsexton.com/),
of yayQuery, TXJS, and redhead fame, works there. I'll be joining the team he
works on, helping to flesh out, document, test, and implement a JavaScript
framework he's been prototyping for the last several months.

I've gotten tiny peeks at the framework as Alex and the rest of the team have
been working on it, starting way back in February of last year, when I flew out
to Austin, signed an NDA, and spoke at BVJS, an internal conference the company
organized to encourage appreciation for JS as a first-class citizen. Talking to
Alex and his colleagues over the last few weeks about the work that's ahead of
them, and how I might be able to help, has quite literally given me goosebumps
more than once. I can't wait.

---

I look back on 2012 with a lot of mixed emotions. I traveled to the UK,
to Amsterdam, to Warsaw, to Berlin two times. I broke a bone in a foreign
country, achievement unlocked. I learned about hardware and made my first
significant code contribution to an open-source project in the process. I met
amazing people who inspired me and humbled me, and even made a few new friends.

What I lost sight of, though, was making sure that I was seeking out new
challenges and facing them head on, making sure that I was seeking
opportunities to learn new things, even when they were hard, even when I didn't
have to. I didn't realize til my work with Ember just how thoroughly I'd let
that slip, and how very much I need it in order to stay sane.

And so while my friend probably has his list of things he will change in the
world of web development in 2013, and while maybe I'll get around to making
that list for myself too, the list I want to be sure to look back on, 12 months
or so from now, is more personal, and contains one item:

*Do work that requires learning new things all the time. Even if that's a
little scary sometimes. Especially if that's a little scary sometimes. In the
end you will be glad.*
