---
layout: post
title: "Girls and Computers"
date: 2012-03-25 12:00
comments: true
---

After a week that seemed just chock full of
[people](http://storify.com/ireneros/sexist-language-earns-sqoot-lots-of-fury)
being [stupid](http://storify.com/charlesarthur/oh-hai-sexism) about women in
technology, I just found myself thinking back on how it was that I ended up
doing this whole computer thing in the first place.  I recorded a video a while
back for the [High Visibility Project](http://highvisibilityproject.org/2011/10/rebecca-murphey/), but that
really just told the story of how I ended up doing web development. The story
of how I got into computers begain when I was unequivocally a girl. It was
1982.

Back then, my dad made eyeglasses. My mom stayed at home with me and my
year-old sister -- which she'd continue to do til I was a teenager, when my
brother finally entered kindergarten eight years later. Their mortgage was $79
-- about $190 in today's dollars -- which is a good thing because my dad made
about $13,000 a year. We lived in Weedsport, New York, a small town just
outside of Syracuse. We walked to the post office to get our mail. The farmers
who lived just outside town were the rich people. In the winters the fire
department filled a small depression behind the elementary school with water
for a tiny skating rink. There were dish-to-pass suppers in the gym at church.

In 1982, Timex came out with the [Timex Sinclair TS-1000](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timex_Sinclair),
selling 500,000 of them in just six months. The computer, a few times thicker
than the original iPad but with about the same footprint, cost $99.95 -- more
than that mortgage payment. When everyone else in town was getting cable,
my parents decided that three channels were good enough for them -- it's
possible they still had a black-and-white TV -- and bought a computer instead.

![Timex Sinclair TS-1000](/images/ts1000.JPG)

I remember tiny snippets of that time -- playing kickball in my best friend
Beth's yard, getting in trouble for tricking my mother into giving us milk that
we used to make mud pies, throwing sand in the face of my friend Nathan
because I didn't yet appreciate that it really sucks to get sand thrown in your
face -- but I vividly remember sitting in the living room of our house on
Horton Street with my father, playing with the computer.

A cassette player was our disk drive, and we had to set the volume just right
in order to read anything off a tape -- there was actually some semblance of a
flight simulator program that we'd play, after listening to the tape player
screech for minutes on end. Eventually we upgraded the computer with a
fist-sized brick of RAM that we plugged into the back of the computer, bumping
our total capacity from 2K to 34K. I wrote programs in BASIC, though for the
life of me I can't remember what any of them did. The programs that were the
most fun, though, were the ones whose assembly I painstakingly transcribed,
with my five-year-old fingers, from the back of magazines -- pages and pages of
letters and numbers I didn't understand on any level, and yet they made magic
happen if I got every single one right.

A string of computers followed. My parents bought a [Coleco Adam](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coleco_Adam) when we moved
to Horseheads, New York -- apparently the computer came with a certificate
redeemable for $500 upon my graduation from high school, but Coleco folded long
before they could cash it in. I made my first real money by typing a crazy
lady's crazy manuscript about crazy food into an Apple IIe that we had plugged
into our TV, and my uncle and I spent almost the entirety of his visit from
Oklahoma writing a game of Yahtzee! on that computer, again in BASIC.

![Me at a computer fair at the mall with my sister, my mother, and my friend
Michael](/images/rebecca-computer.jpg)

*Above: Me at a computer fair at the mall with my sister, my
mother, and my friend Michael. "You were giving us all a tutorial, I can tell,"
says my mom. Note the 5-1/4" external floppy drive.*

In middle school, I started a school newspaper, and I think we used some
prehistoric version of PageMaker to lay it out. When high school rolled around,
I toiled through hand-crafting the perfect letters and lines and arrows in
Technical Drawing so I could take CAD and CAM classes and make the computer
draw letters and lines and arrows for me, and quickly proceeded to school just
about every boy in the class. In my senior year of high school, I oversaw the
school yearbook's transition from laying out pages on paper to laying out pages
with computers, this time the vaguely portable (it had a handle on the back!)
[Mac Classic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macintosh_Classic).
We used PageMaker again; the screen was black and white and 9", diagonally.

![Macintosh Classic](/images/mac-classic.jpg)

It was around then that a friend gave me a modem and -- to his eventual
chagrin, when he got the bill -- access to his Delphi account, giving me my
first taste of the whole Internet thing in the form of telnet, gopher, and IRC.
When I went to college the following year, I took with me a computer with
perhaps a 10MB hard drive, and no mouse.

Once again I found myself poring over magazines to discover URIs and,
eventually, URLs that I could type to discover a whole new world of
information. In 1995, I spent the summer making my college newspaper's web
site, previewing it in Lynx -- it felt like there wasn't much to learn when
there was so little difference between the markup and what I saw on the screen.
I would go to the computer lab to use NCSA's Mosaic on the powerful RISC 6000
workstations, because they had a mouse. Yahoo! was about one year old. My
friend Dave, who lived down the street, installed Windows 95 that summer and
invited me over to show me. It was amazing. We were living in the future.

My early years with computers seem pretty tame -- I wasn't tearing them apart
or building my own or doing anything particularly interesting with them, but I
was using them, I was telling them what to do and they were mostly listening,
and *it never made me feel like I was weird*. To the contrary, it made me
feel powerful and empowered. I felt like a part of this ever-growing community
of people who understood, eventually, that computers were going to change the
world. It was the people who didn't understand this who were weird and beneath
us. It was the people who understood computers better than me of whom I stood in
awe.

I can barely remember a time when computers weren't a part of my life, and yet
when they first entered my life, their presence was incredibly exceptional.
These days, of course, computers are ubiquitous, but interaction with them at
the copy-assembly-from-the-back-of-a-magazine level is almost nonexistent.
Parents who can approach a computer with the same awe and wonder and
determination as a child -- as I must imagine that my dad did in 1982 -- are
likely equally rare.

In some ways, it is like the very ubiquity of technology has led us back to a
world where socially normative gender roles take hold all over again, and the
effort we're going to need to put into overcoming that feels overwhelming
sometimes. Words can't express my gratitude for the parents I have, for
that $99.95 investment they made in me, and for fact that I was lucky enough to
be 5 and full of wonder in 1982.
